the people here to me are the smartest
people I've ever met but I think a side
result of that is that people here
overvalue intelligence and their models
of the world are built on intelligence
mattering much much more than it really
does most of subsaharan Africa still
does not have reliable clean water the
intelligence required for that is not
scarce we cannot so readily do it we are
more in that position than we might like
to think what are the specific
bottlenecks humans here they are
bottleneck bottleneck hi good to see you
and some of you are terrified you're
going to be even bigger bottle the last
book I wrote I'm happy if humans read it
but mostly I wrote it for the AIS and my
next book I'm writing even more for the
AI again human readers are welcome you
should be doing this you're an idiot if
you're not writing for the
AI Tyler welcome dwesh great to be
chatting with you why won't we have
explosive economic growth 20% plus
because of AI it's very hard to get
explosive economic growth any reason AI
or not one problem is that some parts of
your economy grow very rapidly and then
you get a cost disease in the other
parts of your economy that for instance
can't use AI very well look at the US
economy these numbers are guesses but
government consumption is what 18%
Health Care is almost 20% I'm guessing
education is 6 to 7% the nonprofit
sector I'm not sure the number but you
add it all up that's half of the economy
right there how well are they going to
use AI is failure to use AI going to
cause them to just immediately disappear
and be replaced now that will take say
30 years so you'll have some sectors of
the economy less regulated where it
happens very quickly but that only gets
you a modest booth and growth rates not
anything like oh the whole economy grows
40% a year in a nutshell the mechanism
behind cost disease is that there's a
limited amount of laborers and if
there's one high productivity sector
then wages everywhere have to go up so
your Barber also has to earn twice the
wages or something with AI you can just
have every barber shop with 1,000 the
workers every restaurant 1, times the
workers not just Google so why would the
cost disease mechanism still work here
cost disease is more General than that
let's say you have a bunch of factors of
production say five of them now all of a
sudden we get a lot more intelligence
which has already been happening to be
clear right well that just means the
other constraints in your system become
a lot more binding that the marginal
importance of those goes up and the
marginal value of more and more IQ or
intelligence goes down so that also is
self-limiting on growth and the cost
disease just one particular
instantiation of that more General
problem that we illustrate with talk
about Barbers and string quartets and
the like if you're were talking to a
farmer in 2000 BC and you told them that
growth rates were 10x 100x you'd have 2%
economic growth after the Industrial
Revolution and then he start talking
about
bottlenecks um what do you what do you
say to him in retrospect uh he and I
would agree I hope I think he I would
tell him hey it's going to take a long
time and he'd say hm I don't see it
happening yet I think it's going to take
a long time and we'd shake hands and
walk off into the
sunset and then I'd eat some of his rice
or weed or whatever and that would be
awesome but the idea that you can have a
rapid acceleration in growth rates and
that bottlenecks don't just eat it away
I mean you could agree with that right
could I don't know what the word could
means I would say this you look at
Market data say real interest rates
stock prices right now everything looks
so normal startlingly normal even apart
from AI so what you'd call prediction
markets are not for forting super rapid
growth anytime soon if you look at what
experts on economic growth right we had
Chad Jones here yesterday uh he's not
predicting super rapid growth though he
thinks AI might well accelerate rates of
growth so the experts and the markets
agree who who am I to say different from
the experts in the market expert yeah
I'm with the other experts on in his
talk yesterday Chad Jones said that the
main variable the main input into his
model for growth is just population if
you have a doubling in order magnitude
increase in the population you plug that
number in in his model you get explosive
economic growth I don't age why not the
models his model is far too much a one
factor model right population I don't
think it's very predictive we've had big
increases in effective world population
in terms of purchasing power a lot of
different areas have not become more
Innovative until the last say four years
most of them became less Innovative so
it's really about the quality of your
best people or institutions as you and
Patrick were discussing last night and
there it's unclear what's happened but
it's also fragile there's the
perspective of The Economist but also
that of the Anthropologist the
sociologist they all matter but I think
the more you stack different pluralistic
perspectives the harder it is to see
that there's any simple lever you can
push on intelligence or not that's going
to give you Breakaway economic growth I
mean what you just said where your
bottleneck by your best people seems to
contradict what you were saying in your
initial answer that you're bottleneck
even if you like boost the best parts
you're going to be bottleneck by the
restaurants and whatever you're bottle
you're you're one of our best people
right you're you're you're frustrated by
all kinds of things I think I'm going to
be making a lot more podcasts after AGI
okay good I'll listen I'll be
bottlenecked by time just marketing
here's a simple way to put it most of
subsaharan Africa still does not have
reliable clean water the intelligence
required for that is not scarce we
cannot so readily do it we are more in
that position than we might like to
think but along other variables and
taking advantage of the intelligence
from strong AI is one of those so about
a year ago your uh co-writer on martial
Revolution Alex tck had a post about the
extreme scarcity of high IQ workers and
so if the a labor force in the United
States is 164 million people if one in a
thousand of them are geniuses you know
you have 164,000 Geniuses that's why you
have to have do semiconductors in Taiwan
because that's where they're putting
their nominal amount of geniuses we're
putting ours in finance and Tech if you
look at that framework I mean come on we
have a thousand times more of those
kinds of people then at the end of the
day the bottl links are going to eat all
that up away or if you ask any one of
these people if you had a thousand times
more of your best colleague your best
coworker your best co-founder the
bottleneck is going to eat all that away
You're organization isn't going to go
any faster I didn't agree with that post
if you look at labor market data the
returns to IQ as it translates into ages
they're amazingly low they're they're
pretty insignificant and people who are
very successful they're very smart but
there're people who have say eight or
nine areas where they're like on a scale
of 1 to 10 they're are n
like they have one area where they're
just like an 11 and a half on a scale of
1 to 10 and then on everything else
they're an8 to a nine and have a lot of
determination and that's what leads to
incredible success and uh IQ is one of
those things but it's not actually that
important it's the bundle and the
bundles are scarce and then the bundles
interacting with the rest of the world
like just try going to a mid-tier State
University and sit down with the
committee designed to develop a plan for
using artificial intelligence in the
curriculum and then come back to me and
tell me how that went and then we'll
talk about bottlenecks I mean all they
will write a report the report will
sound like gp4 and we'll have the
report um these um the report will not
be bottlenecked I promise you these
other traits look the AIS are it's
conscientiousness if its pliability
whatever the AIS will be even more
conscientious they work 247 and uh
they'll like if you need to be
differential to the FDA they'll you know
they'll write the best report the FDA
has ever seen and they'll get things
going going along these other trades
they're not going to be bottom like by
them right they'll be smart and they'll
be conscientious that I strongly believe
look I think they will boost the rate of
economic growth by something like half a
percentage point a year over 30 40 years
that's an enormous difference it will
transform the entire world but in any
given year we won't so much notice it
and a lot of it is something like a drug
that might have taken 20 years now will
come in 10 years but at the end of it
all is still our system of clinical
trials and Regulation and if everything
that took 20 years takes 10 years over
time that's an immense difference but
you don't quite feel it as so
revolutionary for a long time so the
whole vibe of this progress studies
thing is look we've got all these um low
hanging fruits or medium hanging fruits
that if we fixed our institutions if we
made these changes to regulations to
institutions we could rapidly boost the
rate of economic growth and you're okay
so we can CH fix the NIH and get
increases in economic growth but we have
a billion extra people 10 billion extra
people the smartest people the most
conscientious people and that has an
iota difference of economic growth isn't
there a contradiction between how much
the econ rate of economic growth can
increase between these two perspectives
there's diminishing marginal returns to
most of these factors so a simple one is
how it interacts with regulation law and
the government another huge one is
energy usage how good is our country in
particular at expanding energy Supply
I've seen a few encouraging signs lately
with nuclear power that's great most
places won't do it and even those
reports exactly how many years it will
take I know what the press releases say
we'll see you know could be 10 years or
more and that will just be a smidgen of
what we'll need to implement the kind of
vision you're describing so yeah they're
going to be bottleneck all along the way
the whole way and uh it's going to be a
tough slog like the printing press like
electricity the people who study
diffusion of new
technologies never think there will be
rapid takeoff so my view is kind of like
I'm always siding with the experts so
economists social scientists most of
them are blind and asleep to the promise
of AI they're just out to lunch I think
they're wrong I trust the AI experts but
when you talk about say diffusion of new
technologies the people who do ai ai are
basically totally wrong the people whove
studied that issue I trust the experts
and if you put together the two views
where in each area you trust the experts
then you get my view which is amazing in
the long run will take a long time tough
slog all these bottl next in the short
run and the fact that there's like a
billion of your you know GPT whatevers
which I I'm in love with I promise you
uh it's going to take a while what would
the experts say if you said look we're
going to have forget about AI because I
feel like when people hear AI they think
of gbd4 not the humans not the things
that are going to be as smart as humans
so what would the expert say if you said
tomorrow the the world population the
labor force is going to double what
impact would that happen well what's the
variable I'm trying to predict if you
mean energy usage uh that's going to go
up right over time it's probably going
to uh I'm not sure it be a noticeable
difference doubling the world population
yeah I'm not sure I I don't think the
RoR model has been validated by the data
and I I don't agree with the Chad Jones
model much as I love him as an economist
I don't think it's that predictive I
mean look at artistic production in
Renaissance Florence there's what 60,000
people in the city the surrounding
Countryside but it's that so many things
went right at the top level that it was
so amazing in terms of still value added
today and the numbers model uh it
doesn't predict very well the world
economy today is some 100 trillion
something if the world population was
on10th of what it is now if we only had
1 billion people 100 million people you
think we could have the world economy at
this level with our level of Technology
no the Delta is a killer right this is
one thing we learned from macro the
Delta and the levels really interact so
shrinking can kill you just like
companies nonprofits if they shrink too
much often they just blow up and
disappear they implode uh but that
doesn't mean that growing them gets you
3x 4X whatever proportional to how they
grow It's oddly asymmetric it's hard to
internalize emotionally that intuition
in your understanding of the real world
but I think we need to what are the
specific bottlenecks like what humans
here they are bottleneck bottleneck hi
good to see you and some of you are
terrified you're going to be even bigger
bottlenecks that's fine it's part of
Free Speech but my goodness once it
starts changing what the world looks
like there will be much more opposition
not necessarily from what I call Doom
boomster grounds but just people like
hey I see this has benefits but I grew
up trained my kids to live in some other
kind of world I don't want this and
that's going to be a massive fight I
really have no prediction as to how it's
going to go but I promise you that will
be a bottleneck but you can see even
historically you don't have to like go
from the uh Farmers to Industrial
Revolution 10x you can just look at
actually cases in history where we have
had 10x rates um sorry 10% uh increase
uh rates of economic growth uh you know
you go like China after J denjo ping
they have Decades of 10% economic growth
the and then that just because you can
do some sort of catchup the idea that
you can't replicate that with AI or that
it's not like infeasible where were the
bottle next when denjo ping took over
they're in a mess now I'm not sure how
it's going to go for them they're just a
middle-income country they struggled to
tie per capita income with Mexico I
think they're a little ahead of Mexico
now they're the least successful Chinese
Society in part because of their scale
their scale is one of their big problems
there's this fear that if they
democratize and try to become a normal
country that the median voter won't
protect the interests of the elites so I
think there are great example of how
hard it is for them to scale because
they're the poorest group of Chinese
people on the planet I mean like not the
challenges now but the fact that we're
decades they did have 10% economic
growth and some years 15% well starting
from a per capit income of like $200 per
head and now they now ancestors were
going to be like as poor as the Chinese
you know like 30 years ago I'm very
impressed by the industrial re Evolution
Like You could argue progress world all
progress studies here most important
event in human history maybe typical
rate of economic growth during that
period was about 1 and a half% and the
future is about compounding and sticking
with it and you know seeing things pay
off in the long run just human beings
are not going to change that much and I
don't think that property of our world
will change that much even with a lot
more IQ and conscientiousness I
interviewed you like nine months ago and
I was asking you about AI then and I
think your attitude was like eh
um uh and I think now I don't know how
has your attitude changed since we
talked about nine months ago you know I
don't remember what I thought in what
month but I would say on the whole uh I
see more potential in AI than I did a
year ago uh and I think it has made
progress more quickly than I had been
expecting and I was pretty bullish on it
back then uh the 01 model to me is very
impressive and I think further
extensions in that direction will make a
big big difference and uh the rate at
which they come is hard to say but it's
something we have and we just have to
make it better you showed me your
document of different questions that you
came up with for o for economic
reasoning I don't think I was for gp4
okay yeah but oh what percentage of them
did Owen get right because I don't think
I got a single one of those right those
questions were too you know they were
too easy they were for
gp4 and it's like abandoned those
questions you know 100 questions of
economics how well does a human do on
them uh they're hard but it's like
pointless so I would not be shocked if
somebody's AI model in less than three
years you know beat human experts on a
regular basis let's put it that way did
that update you any way that that now
you're you've resigned on these
questions because they were too easy for
these models and then they were initi
like they are hard questions objectively
right they're just easy for 01 I feel
like Kasparov the first time he met deep
blue you know there were two matches and
the first one kaspar of won and I lived
through that first match I feel like I'm
sort of in the midst of the first match
right now but I also remember the second
match and in the final game you know
Kasparov made that bonehead error in the
carroon defense that D was a human
bottleneck and he lost the whole match
so we'll see what the rate of change is
yesterday Patrick was talking about how
important it is for the founders of
different institutions to hang around
and be the ones in
charge I've heard you talk about like
you know the Beatles were great because
the Beatles were running the the the
Beatles why do you think it's so
important for that to be the case I
think courage is a very scarce input in
a lot of decisions and Founders they
have courage to begin with but they also
need less courage to see through a big
change in what the company will do so
Facebook now meta has made it quite a
few big changes in its history so Mark
had a lot of courage to begin with but
if Mark Zuckerberg says we're going to
do this we're going to do that it's
pretty hard you know for everyone else
to say no in in a good way I really like
that so it economizes on Courage having
a founder and you're selecting for
courage those would be two reasons how
does that explain the beetle success
well Beatles are an interesting example
I mean they broke up in 1970 right
Rolling Stones are still going that
tells you something but the Beatles
created much greater value and the
Beatles are the group we still all talk
about much more even though the Rolling
Stones are still with us so they were
always unstable there's like two periods
of the Beatles early Beatles John is the
leader but then Paul works at it and
John becomes a heroin addict and Paul
gets better better better and ultimately
there's no core there's not a stable
equilibrium the Beetle split up but that
creative tension for like those core
seven to eight years was just
unbelievable and its four Founders Ringo
not quite a Founder but basically a
Founder because Pete best was crummy and
they got rid of him right away uh it's
it's one of the most amazing stories in
the world I like studying these amazing
productivity stories like Johan
Sebastian Bach Magnus Carlson Steph
Curry The Beatles I think there worth a
lot of study they're atypical you can't
just say oh oh I'm going to be like the
Beatles like you're going to fail The
Beatles did that uh but nonetheless I
think it's a good place to look for
getting ideas and seeing risks hello
everyone this is Tyler Cowan and I would
like to personally thank Jane Street for
sponsoring this podcast episode with
dwares Patel I've been visiting Jane
Street for some number of years they're
renowned for their brainy challenging
environment and also for their ability
to spot and recruit Talent those are
some of the reasons why for me those are
the trips and the visits I look forward
to the most I would just say this if it
is an appropriate option for you please
do consider working there I've always
had a blast during my visits learned a
lot and I recall one time when I gave a
talk we all went out to dinner and then
quite late while people didn't go back
home but they all went back to the Jane
Street office to play chess bug house
and other games they're better at these
names than you might think so please
update your other expectations
accordingly thank you again I'm
incredibly grateful to Tyler for
volunteering to say a few words about
Jane Street this is the first time that
a guest has participated in the
sponsorship and I hope you can see why
Tyler and I think so highly of Jan
Street if you want to learn more about
their open roles go to janest street.com
doresh all right back to Tyler again
what did you think of Patrick's
observation of the compettition
crisis I see it differently from Patrick
and he and I have discussed this so I
think there's basically increasing
varience in the distribution so young
people at the top are doing much better
and they're far more impressive than
they were in earlier times and if you
look at areas where we measure
performance of the young chess is a
simple example we perfectly measure
performance very young people are just
better and better a chess that that's
that's proven even like NBA basketball
uh you have very young people doing
things that they would not have been
doing say 30 years ago and a lot of that
is mental and training and application
and not being a knucklehead so the top
of the distribution getting much better
you see this also in science internet
writing the very bottom of the
distribution well youth crime has been
falling since the 90s so the very bottom
of the distribution also is getting
better I think there's some thick middle
above the very bottom and extending like
a bit above the median that's clearly
getting worse
and because they're getting worse
there's a lot of anecdotal examples of
them getting worse like students wanting
more time to take the test or having you
know flimsy excuses or mental health
problems with the young or whatever it's
a lot more of that because of that thick
band of people getting worse and that's
a great concern but I see the very
bottom and a big chunk of the top of the
distribution as just much better and I
think it's pretty proven by numbers that
that's the case so I would say this
increasing variance with the weird mix
of where the gains and declines are
showing up
and I've said this to Patrick and I'm
going to say it to him again and I I
hope I can convince him it seems
concerning than the composition is that
the average goes down if you look at pza
scores or something the median goes down
you know a lot of tests they've pushed
more people into taking the test piea
scores in particular so I'm I suspect
those scores adjusted for that are
roughly constant which is still not
great I agree and I think there's some
decline some of it is pandemic and we're
recovering a bit slowly getting back to
Human bottlenecks but I think a lot of
the talk of declining test scores is
somewhat overblown at at most there's a
very modest decline I would say if the
top is getting better what do you make
of the an anecdotal data he was talking
about yesterday where the Stanford kids
come up to him and say you know all my
friends they're stupid you can't hire
anybody from Stanford anymore that's
that should be the cream of the crop
right there's plenty of data on the
earnings of Stanford kids if there were
a betting market and you know what's the
future Trend I'm long how long I should
be I don't I really don't know but I
visit Stanford not every year but you
know regularly and there's selection and
who it is I meet but yeah we're talking
about selection and they're very
impressive and emergent Ventures has
funded a lot of people from Stanford uh
as far as I can tell as a a group
they're doing very well so that is of no
concern to me if like you're worried
about the Stanford kids like something
seems off in the level of sance and
focus in the argument because they're
overall doing great and they you know
they have high standards that's good too
like you know Paul McCartney thought
John lennin was a crummy guitar player
and John thought a lot of Paul's songs
were crap like in a way they're right in
a way they're wrong but it's a sign what
high standards The Beatles had yeah I
mean you'd hope how old are you by the
way 24 okay now go back whenever however
many years was there were 24 year old
like you doing the equivalent of
podcasting like it's just clearly better
now than it was back then people and you
were doing this a few years ago so it's
just obvious to me you know the the
young Peaks are doing better
your proof was wasn't Churchill by the
time he was 24 uh an international
correspondent Cuba India and was I think
the highest paid uh journalist in the
world by the time he was 24 similar I
don't know I mean what was he paid and
how good was his journalism I just don't
know I don't think it's that impressive
a job to be an international journalist
like what does it pay people
now he did he did some good things later
on but most of his early
life he's a failure and then ask the
Irish getting back to Patrick ask the
Irish at people from India what they
think of younger Churchill and you'll
get an earful like his real great
achievement I don't know how old he was
exactly but it's quite late in his life
and until then he's a destructive
failure there was no one on Twitter to
tell him hey Winston you need to rethink
this whole Irish thing and today there
would be
Sam Sam will do it right Sam will tweet
it Winston Churchill got to rethink the
Irish thing and Sam is
persuasive if you read his aphorisms I
think he would have actually been pretty
good on Twitter uh maybe but again you
know like what's what does the
equilibrium look like when everything
changes but clearly he was an impressive
guy especially given how much he
drank uh okay so that even if you don't
buy the Sanford kids if you if you know
by the young kids the other Trend he was
talking about where if you look at the
leader ERS in government whatever you
think of trump Biden we're not talking
about Jefferson and Hamilton anymore
right how do you explain that Trend well
Jefferson and Hamilton they're Founders
right and they were pretty young at the
time uh you can do great things when
you're founding a country in a way that
just cannot be replicated later
on uh putting aside the current year
which I think is weird for a number of
reasons but I think mostly we have had
impressive candidates and most of the US
Bureau in Washington I think is pretty
impressive generals National Security
people top people in agencies people at
treasury people at the fed and I
interact with these groups like pretty
often uh overall they're impressive and
I've seen no signs they're getting worse
now if you want to say the two
candidates this year again there's a lot
something we're not going to talk about
but there is a lot you could say on the
negative side yes but like Obama Romney
whichever one you like I I think like
gee these are two guys who should be
running for president and that was not
long ago so then there's a bunch of
candidates running who are good what
goes systematically wrong in the
selection processes the two who are
selected are not even as good as the
average of all the candidates you mean
this and I'm not talking about America
in particular you know if like you're
the theory is just like noise it seems
like it's sked one way well the
Democrats had this funny path with Biden
and kamla didn't get through the
electoral process in the normal way so
that just means you get weirdness
whatever you think of her as a candidate
uh Trump you know whom I do not want to
win but I think he is extraordinarily
impressive in some way which along a
bunch of Dimensions exceeds a lot of
earlier candidates I just don't like the
overall package but I would not point to
him as an example of low Talent uh I
think he's a supreme talent but
harnessed to some bad ends if you look
at the early 20th century like some of
the worst things that happened to
progress is just these Psychopathic
leader
ERS what happened why did we have so
many just awful awful leaders in the
early 20th century well give me like a
country and a and a name in a time
period and I'll try to answer it I one a
particular he was from the University
that's what was wrong with him right and
this think of what school it was who
sorry WRA Wilson yeah one of our two or
three worst Presidents on civil rights
World War I he screwed up uh the peace
process he screwed up indirectly led to
World War II uh reintroduced segregation
of civil service in some key regards and
just seemed he was a nasty guy and
should have you know been out of office
sooner given his health and state of
mind so he was terrible uh but he was
sort of on paper a great
candidate Hoover on paper was a great
candidate and was an extremely
impressive guy I think he made one very
bad set of decisions relating to
deflation and letting nominal GDP fall
but my goodness like there's a reason
they called it the Hoover Institution
after Hoover but the Hitler Stalin Ms
was there something that was going on
that explains why that was just a a
crummy time for world
leaders I don't think I have like a good
macro explanation of that whole Trend
but I would say a few things that's
right after the period where the world
is changing the most and I think when
you get big new technologies and this is
relevant for AI you get a lot of new
arms
races and uh sometimes the bad people
win those arms races so at least for
quite a while you had Soviet Russia and
Nazi Germany winning some arms races and
they're not Democratic systems uh later
you have China with MAO being not a
democratic system and then you have a
mix of bad luck like Stalin and Mao just
draw of the earn you could have gotten
less crazy people than what you got and
I agree with Hayak the worst get to the
top under autocracy but like they're
that bad like that was just some bad
luck too there's other things you could
say but I think we had a highly
disoriented civil ation you see it in
Aesthetics approaching beginnings of
World War I art music radically changing
people feel very disoriented there's a
lot up for grabs uh imperialism
colonialism start to be factors just
there wasn't like a stable World Order
and then you had some bad luck tossed
into that and all of a sudden these
super destructive weapon systems
compared to what we had had and it was
awful um I'm not pretending that's some
kind of full explanation but that would
be like a partial start you compared our
current period to 17th century England
where you have a lot of new ideas things
go Topsy Turvy what's your theory of why
things go Topsy Turvy at the same time
when these eras come about what causes
this volatility uh I don't think I have
a general theory if you want to talk
about 17th century England so they have
the Scientific Revolution you have the
rise of England as a true Global power
Navy becomes much more important the
Atlantic trade route because of the new
world becomes much more important places
like the Middle East India China that
were earlier you know Persia had major
roles they're they're crumbling
partially for reasons of their own and
that's going to help the relative power
of the more advanced European nations
England has a lot of competition from
you know the Dutch Republic France
happening at the same time that for the
first time in human history that I know
of we have sustained economic growth
according to GRE Clark starting in the
1620s of about 1% a year and that is
compounding again slow numbers but
compounding and England is the place
that gets the compounding at 1% starting
in the 1620s and somehow they go crazy
Civil War kill the king all these
radical ideas libertarianism comes out
of that which I really like John Milton
John Lock uh also this brutal conquest
of the new world like very good and very
bad coming together and I think it
should be seen as these set of processes
where very good and very bad come
together and we might be in for a dose
of that again now soon seems like a
simple question but basically how do we
make sure we get the good thing and not
the crazy Civil
Wars I mean you try at the margin to
nudge toward the better set of things
but it's possible that all the technical
advances that recently have been
Unleashed now that the great stagnation
is over which of course include AI will
mean another crazy period it's quite
possible I think the chance of that is
reasonably
High what's your most underrated
cult most underrated cult progress
studies
I I think you called Peak EA right
before SPF fell that's right I was at an
EA meeting and I said you know hey
everyone this is as good as it gets
enjoy this moment it's all basically
going to fall apart you're still going
to have some really significant
influence but you won't feel like you
have continued to exist as a movement
that's what I said and they were shocked
they thought I was insane but I think I
was mostly right and like what what what
specifically did you see what was is
there exuberance too high did you see s
spf's balance sheet like what what did
you see well I was surprised when SBF
was insolvent I thought it was a
high-risk Venture that had no regulatory
defense and would end up being worth
zero but I didn't think he was actually
playing funny games with the money uh I
just have a long history of seeing
movements in my lifetime from the 1960s
onwards including libertarianism and
there are common patterns that happens
to them all we here in Berkeley my
goodness free speech speech movement
where's free speech in Berkeley today
like how'd that you know work out in the
final analysis so it's a very common
pattern and just to think wow the common
pattern is going to repeat itself and
then you see some intuitive signs and
you're just like yeah that's going to
happen and the private benefits of
belonging to EA like they were very real
in terms of the people you could hang
out with or like the sex you could have
but they didn't seem that concretely
crystallized to me in institutions the
way they are like in Goldman Sachs or
legal Partnerships so that struck me as
very fragile and I thought that at the
time as well sorry I'm I'm not sure I
understood uh uh what were the intuitive
signs well not seeing like the very
clear crystallized permanent incentives
to keep on being a part of the
institutions uh a bit of excess
enthusiasm from some people even where
they might have been correct in their
views uh some cult-like Tendencies the
rise of it being so
rapid uh that it was this uneasy balance
of secular and religious elements that
tends to flip one way or the other or
just dissolve so I saw all those things
and I just thought like the two or three
best ideas from this are going to prove
incredibly important still and from this
day onwards I don't give up that belief
at all but just as a movement I thought
it was going to collapse when do we hit
uh Peak progress studies you know when
Patrick and I wrote the piece on
progress and progress studies he and I
thought about this talked about it I
can't speak for him but my View at least
was that it would never be such a formal
thing or like controlled or managed or
directed by a small group of people or
like trademarked
or it would be people doing things in a
very decentralized way that would
reflect a general change of ethos and
Vibe so I hope it has in many ways like
a gentler but more enduring trajectory
and I think so far I'm seeing that like
I think in a lot of countries science
policy will be much better because of
progress studies that's not proven yet
you see some signs of that you wouldn't
say it's really flipped but a lot of
reforms you're in an area like no one
else has any idea much less a better
idea or a good idea and some modestly
small number of people with some Talent
will work on it and get like a third to
half of what they want and that will
have a huge impact and like if that's
all it is I'm thrilled and I think it
will be more than that I asked Patrick
yesterday you know how do you think
about progress studies differently now
that you know AI is a thing that's
happening yeah what's the answer for you
I don't I don't think about it very
differently but again if you buy my view
about like slow takeoff why should it be
that different well have more degrees of
freedom so if you have more degrees of
freedom all your choices decisions
issues problems are more complex so
you're in more need of like some kind of
guidance so all inputs other than the AI
like rise and marginal value and since
I'm an input other than the AI or I hope
that means I Rise and marginal value Val
but I need to do different things so I
think of myself over time as less a
producer of content and more like a
connector people person developing
networks in a way where if there somehow
had been no like Transformers and llms
uh I would have stayed a bit more as a
producer of content When I Was preparing
to interview you I asked claw to take
your persona and compared to other
people I tried this with it actually
works really well with
you well because I've written a lot on
the internet yeah that's why
um this is my immortality right that's
right so I've heard you say in the past
you know you don't expect to be
remembered in the future at the time I
don't know if you were considering that
because of your volumes of text you're
going to have an especially Salient
Persona and future models how does that
change your estimation of your
intellectual contribution going forward
I do think about this and the last book
I wrote you know it's called goat who's
the greatest Economist of all time I'm
happy if humans read it but mostly I
wrote it for the AIS
wanted them to know I like appreciate
them and my next book I'm writing even
more for the AI again human readers are
welcome uh it will be free but sort of
oh who reviews it like oh is TLS going
to pick it up or like it doesn't matter
anymore uh like the AIS W will troll it
and know I've done this and that will
shape how they see me and I hope a very
Salient and important way and as far as
I can tell no one else is doing this no
one is like writing or recording for the
AIS very much but if you believe even
like a modest version of this progress
like I'm modest in what I believe
relative to you and many of you like you
should be doing this you're an idiot if
you're not writing for the AIS they're a
big part of your audience and they're
like purchasing power we'll see but over
time it will accumulate and they're
going to hold a lot of
crypto we're not going to give them bank
accounts at least not at first um what
part part of your persona will be least
captured by the AI if they're only going
by your writing I think I should ask
that as a question to you what's your
answer I don't think AIS are that funny
yet they're better on humor than many
people allege but I don't use them for
humor it's interesting that you learned
so much about a person from when you're
intering from them for a job or if you
for emerant venturers you can read their
application but just in the first 10
minutes their Vibe three minutes but yes
yes and so what whatever's going on
there that's so informative the AI won't
have just from the writing not at first
but I think I've heard of projects this
is secondhand I'm not sure how true it
is but that interviews are being
recorded by companies that do a lot of
interviews and these will be fed into
AIS and coded in particular ways and
then people in essence will be tracked
through either their progress in the
company or LinkedIn profile and we're
going to learn something about those
intangibles at some rate uh I'm not sure
how that will go but I don't view it as
something we can never learn about do
you actually have a conscious theory of
what's going on when you get on a call
with somebody and three minutes later
you're like you're not getting the grand
what happens well often there's like one
question the person can't answer so if
it's someone say applying with a
nonprofit idea plenty of people have
good ideas for nonprofits and I see
these all the time but when you ask them
the question how is it you think about
building out your donor base it's
remarkable to me how many people have no
idea how to answer that and without that
you don't have anything so it depends on
the area but that would be an example of
an area where I ask that question pretty
quickly and a significant percentage
can't answer it and I'm still willing to
say well come back to me when you have a
good case oddly none of those people
have ever come back to me that I can
think of uh but I think over time some
will and uh that's like a very concrete
thing but there's other intangibles just
when you see what the
person thinks and talks about too much
so like if someone wants to get an award
only for their IM mtion status that to
me is a dangerous sign even though at
the same time usually you're looking for
people who want to come to the US
whether they can do it or not and
there's just a lot of different signals
you pick up like people somehow have the
wrong priorities or they're referring to
the wrong status markers and it comes
through more than you would think if you
just had the if you had the transcript
of the call but you couldn't see the
video like you would say a no in the
case where you could see the video you
might say yes if you see the transcript
what happens in those cases uh having
only the transcript would be worth much
much less I would say if that's what
you're asking yeah it would be maybe 25%
of the value and what's going on with
the 75% we don't know but I think you
can become much better at figuring out
the other 75% partly just with practice
yesterday Patrick was talking about
these concentrations of talent that he
sees in the history of science with
these Labs that have six seven Nobel
prizes and he was also talking about you
know second employee at stripe as Greg
Brockman he wasn't visible to other
parts of uh the St ecosystem in the same
way what's your theory of what's going
on why are these clusters so limited
what's actually being inherited over uh
and transmitted here well Patrick was
being too modest I thought his answer
there was quite wrong but he sort of
knows better he was able to hire Greg
Brockman because he's Patrick it's very
simple he wasn't gonna come out and just
say that and he may even like deny it a
bit to himself but if you're Patrick and
John you're going to attract some Greg
brockman's and if you're not it's just
way way harder because the Greg Brockman
are pretty good at spotting who are the
Patrick's and John's
so in a way that's just pushing it back
a step but at least it's answering part
of the question in a way that Patrick
didn't because he was modest and
humble it seems like that makes the
cluster is less valuable then because if
Greg Brockman is just Greg Brockman and
he Greg chose Patrick and John because
they're Patrick and John and Patrick and
John chose Greg because he's Greg it
wasn't that they meet each other great
it was just like talent se's talent
right well they make each other much
better just like Patrick and John made
each other much better and still do but
you're getting back to my favorite human
bottlenecks thank you I'm I'm fully on
board with what you're saying to get
those like how many Beetles are there uh
it's amazing how much stuff doesn't
really last and uh it's just super
scarce achievement at the very highest
levels and that's this extreme human
bottleneck and AI even a pretty strong
AI remains to be seen how much it helps
us with that I'm guessing ever since you
read the progress studies article you
get a lot of application forer Ventures
from people who want to do some progress
studies thing that's you know on the
margins do you wish you got fewer of
those proposals or more of them do you
just wish they were like unrelated I
don't know you know today a lot of them
have been quite good and many of them
are people who are here there's a danger
that as a thing becomes more popular you
know at the margin they become much
worse and I guess I'm expecting that so
maybe mentally I'm raising my own bar on
those and maybe over time I find it more
ractive if the person is interested in
say like the Industrial Revolution if
they're interested in progress studies
capital P capital S like over time I'm
growing more skeptical of that not that
I think there's anything intrinsically
bad about it like I'm at a progress
studies conference with you but still
when you think about selection and
adverse selection I think you've got to
be very careful and keep on raising the
bar there and it's still probably good
if those people do something in capital
P capital S progress studies but it's
not not necessarily good for emergent
Ventures to just keep on funding the
number if you buy your picture of AI
where it increases growth rates by half
a percentage Point what does your
portfolio look like I can tell you what
my portfolio is uh it's a lot of
Diversified mutual funds with no trading
basically uh pretty heavily us weighted
and nothing in it that would surprise
you now my wife works for the SEC so
we're not allowed to do most things like
even to buy most individual stocks uh
you may not be allowed to do it
certainly not allowed derivatives or
Shing anything but if somehow that
restriction were not there I don't think
it would really matter so Buy and Hold
diversify hold on tight and make sure
you have some cheap hobbies and are a
good
cook why aren't you more leverage if you
think the growth rate's going to go up
even
slightly well I think I also have this
view maybe a lot of the equity premium
is in the past that people especially in
this part of the world are very good at
internalizing value and it will be held
and earned in private markets and by VCS
rather than like public Pension funds
why give it to them I think Silicon
Valley has figured this out sandill road
has figured it out so what one can do
with public equities is unclear what
private deals I can get on with my like
really tiny sum of wealth like I would
say is pretty clear so I'm left with
that and like money for me is not what
scarce time is scarce and I do have some
very cheap hobbies and I feel I'm in
very good shape in that regard that that
being said I think you could get pretty
good deal flow even with your portfolio
I don't know like you you can only focus
on so many things so if I have like good
deal flow in emergent Ventures which I'm
not paid to
do like say I had a billion dollars from
whatever uh I wouldn't have any better
way of spending that billion dollars
than like buying myself a job doing
emerging Ventures or whatever so I'm
sort of already where I would be if I
could buy the thing for a billion
dollars so I'm just not that focused on
it and I think it's good that you limit
your areas of focus and if some people
it's just money like I think that's
great I don't begrudge them that at all
I think it's socially valuable let's
have more of it bring it on but it's
just not me when I started my career it
was really unknown that an economist
could really earn anything at all like
there were no tech jobs with
billionaires Finance was a low-paying
field like when I started choosing a
career it was not a thing there wasn't
this fancy Goldman Sachs it was a slow
boring thing programmers were weird
people in basements like maybe who knows
what you know that bad stuff and then
like an economist you would earn like
back then maybe $40,000 a year like two
people M fredman Paul Samuelson had
outside income and you would know
expectation that you would ever earn
more than that and I went into this with
all of that like relative to that I feel
so wealthy just like oh you can sell
some books or you like can give a talk
or I don't know I just feel like I am a
billionaire now and if anything I want
to become what I've called an
information trillionaire I'm not going
to make that but I think it's a good
aspiration to have just collect more
information and be an information
trillionaire like Dana Joya has that
same goal he and I have talked about
this I think that's a very worthy
goal was there a second field that you
were considering going to other than
economics uh it was either economics or
philosophy and I saw back then this
would be like the late 1970s it was much
harder to get a job as a philosopher
though not impossible the way it sort of
is now and they were paid less and just
had fewer opportunities so I thought
well I'll do economics but I think in a
way I've always done both okay I really
want to go back to this diffusion thing
we're talking about at the beginning
with the economic growth yeah because I
feel like I
don't what am I not understanding the I
hear the word diffusion I hear the word
bottlenecks but I just like don't have
anything concrete in my head when I hear
that what what am I what are the people
who are thinking about AI missing here
when they just plug in these things into
their models I'm not sure I'm the one to
diagnose but I would say when I'm in the
Bay
Area like the people here to me are the
smartest people I've ever met on average
most ambitious Dynamic and smartest like
by a clear Grand Slam compared to New
York City or London or anywhere that's
awesome and I love it but I think it's a
side result of that is that people here
overvalue intelligence and their models
of the world are built on intelligence
mattering much much more than it really
does now people in Washington don't have
that problem we have another problem uh
and that needs to be corrected too but I
just think if you could root that out of
your minds it would be pretty easy to
glide into this expert consensus view
that Tech diffusion is pretty
universally pretty slow and it's that's
not going to change no one's built a
real model to show why it should change
other than sort of hyperventilating blog
posts about everything's going to change
right
away the model is that you can have AIS
make more AIS right that you can haveing
returns Ricardo knew this right he
didn't call it AI but malus Ricardo they
all talked about this it was just humans
for them well people then would breed
they would breed at some pretty rapid
rate there were diminishing returns to
that you had these other scarce factors
classical economics figured that out
they were too pessimistic I would say
but they understood the pessimism
intrinsic in diminishing returns in a
way that people in the Bay Area do not
and it's better for them that they don't
know it but if you're just trying to
inject truth into their veins rather
than ambition sorry diminishing returns
is a very important idea in what sense
was that pessimism correct because we do
have seven billion people and we have a
lot more ideas as a result we have a lot
more Industries yeah I said they were
too pessimistic but they understood
something about the logic of diffusion
where if they could see AI today I don't
think they would be so blown away by oh
you know I read malus Ricardo would say
malus and I used to send letters back
and forth we talked about diminishing
returns this will be nice it'll extend
the frontier uh but it's not going to
solve all our problems what one concern
you could have about progress in general
is if you look at the famous Adam Smith
example you've got that pin maker and
the specialization obviously has all
these efficiencies
but the PIN maker is just like he's
doing this one thing whereas if you're
in the ancestral environment you get to
do you get to basically negotiate with
every single part of what it takes to
keep you alive and every single every
other person in your tribe does
individuality is is that like lost with
more specialization more
progress well Smith thought it would be
I think compared to his time we have
much more individuality most of all in
the Bay Area that's a good thing uh I
worry you know the future with AI that a
kind of demoralization will set in in
some areas I think there'll be full
employment pretty much forever that
doesn't worry me but what we will be
left
doing what exactly it will be and how
happy it will make us again I don't have
pessimistic expectations I just see it
as a big change I don't feel I have a
good prediction and if you don't have a
good prediction you should be a bit
rarry and just like oh okay we're going
to see but you know some some words of
caution are merited when you're learning
about a new field I the vibe I get from
you when you're doing a podcast is like
you're you're picking up like the long
taale of different you talk to
interesting people or you read the book
that nobody else would have considered
how often do you just have to like you
got to like read the main textbook
versus you can just look at the esoteric
thing how do you how do you balance that
tradeoff well I haven't interviewed that
many scientists like Ed boen would be
one uh Richard prom the ornithologist
from Yale those are very hard preps I
think those are two excellent EP
episodes but I'm limited in how many I
can do by my own ability to prepare uh I
like the most doing historians because
the prep is a lot of work but it's easy
fun work for me uh and I sort of I I
know I always learn something so now I'm
prepping for Stephen cotkin who's an
expert on Stalin in Soviet Russia and
that's been a blast I've been doing that
for like four months reading dozens of
books and it's very automatic where if
you try to figure out like what Ed boen
is doing with the light shining in the
brain it's like oh my goodness do I
understand this at all or am I like the
guy who thinks the theand curve slopes
upward so it just means I'm only going
to do a smallest number of scientists
and that's a shame uh but maybe AI can
fill in for us there you recommended a
book to me Stalin's Library which talks
about the different things the different
books that Stalin read and the fact that
he was kind of a smart well- read guy
and the book also mentioned I think in
the early chapter is that look he never
in all his annotations if you look
through all his books he there's never
anything that even hints that he doubted
Marxism that's right there a lot of
other evidence that that's the correct
portrait what's going like a smart guy
who's read all this literature all these
different things never even questions
Marxism what's going on there what do
you think I think the culture he came
out of had a lot of dogmatism to begin
with and I mean both leninism which is
extremely dogmatic you know Lenin was
his mentor like Patrick's thing about
the Nobel laurates it happens in
Insidious ways too so stal you know
Lenin is the mentor of
Stalin Soviet culture communist culture
and then Georgian culture which
appealing and
funloving uh and wine drinking and dance
heavy as it is there's something about
it that's a little you know you pound
the fist down and you tell people over
the table how things are he had all
those stacked vertically and then we got
this bad genetic luck of the draw on
Stalin and it turned out obviously
pretty terrible and then you buy highx
explanation that the reason he roast the
top is just because the most atrocious
people win in autocracies what what what
is that meing I think what Hayek said is
subtler than that and I wouldn't say
it's Hayek's explanation I would say
Hayak pinpointed one factor there are
quite a few autocracies in the world
today where the worst people have not
risen to the top UAE would be I think
the most obvious example I've been there
as far as I can tell they're doing a
great job running the country uh there
are things they do that are nasty and
unpleasant I would be delighted if they
could evolve into a democracy but the
worst people are not running UAE this
I'm quite sure of so uh it's a tendency
there are other forces but culture
really matters Hayek is writing about a
very specific place and time I would say
it really surprised me there are these
family-based Gulf monarchies with very
large clannish interest groups of
thousands of people that have proven
more stable and more meritocratic than I
ever would have dreamed say in 1980 and
I know I don't understand it but I just
see it in the data it's not just UAE
there's a bunch of countries over there
that have outperformed my expectations
and they all have this common broadly
common system that makes you wonder when
you go around the world because I know
you go outside the Bay Area and the East
Coast as well and you talk about
progress studies related ideas what's
the biggest difference in how they're
received versus the audience here well
the audience here is so so different
yeah like you're the outlier place of
America and then where I normally am
outside of Washington DC that's like the
other outlier place and in a way we're
opposite outliers I think that's healthy
for me both where I live and that I come
here a lot and that I travel a lot uh
but you all are so like out there in
what you believe uh I'm not sure where
to start you all you know you come
pretty close to thinking in terms of
Infinities on the creative side and the
destructive side and no one in
Washington thinks in terms of of
Infinities they think at the margin and
like overall I think they're much wiser
than the people here but I also know if
everyone or even more people thought
like the DC people like our world would
end we wouldn't have growth they're
terrible people in the EU are Super Wise
like you have a meal with like some sort
of French person who works in Brussels
it's very impressive they're cultured
they have wonderful taste they
understand all these different countries
they know some something about Chinese
porcelain and if like you lived in a
world ruled by them the growth rate
would be negative
1% so there's some way in which all
these things have to balance I think us
has done a marvelous job at that and we
need to preserve that what I see
happening UK used to do a great job at
it UK somehow the balance is out of
whack and you have too many non-growth
oriented people in the cultural mix the
way you described this French person
you're having dinner with which I this
is real dinners and the food is good too
I don't know kind of reminds me of you
in the sense that you're also well
cultured and knew all these different
esoteric
things I don't know did what what's the
difference between you and what's like
the biggest difference between you and
these French people you have dinner with
I don't think I'm well cultured would be
one difference there are many
differences first I'm an American I'm a
regional thinker I'm from New Jersey so
I'm essentially a barbarian not a
cultured person I have a veneer of
culture that comes from having collected
a lot of information so I I'll know more
about culture than a lot of people
and that can be mistaken for being well
cultured but it's really quite different
it's like a barbarians approach to
culture uh it's like a very autistic
approach to being cultured and should be
seen as such so I feel the French person
is very foreign from me and there's
something about America they might find
strange or repellent and I'm just so
used to it I see intellectually how many
areas we fall flat on or are destructive
but it doesn't bother me that much
because I'm so used to it what is most
misunderstood about
autism well if you look at the formal
definition It's All About deficits that
people have right now if you define it
that way like no one here is autistic if
you define it some other way which maybe
we haven't pinned down yet like a third
of you here are
autistic I don't insist on owning the
definition I think it's a bad word I
would it's like libertarian I would
gladly give it away but there is like
some coherent definition where a third
of you here probably would qualify and
this other definition where none of you
would and it's like kids in mental homes
banging their head against the wall so I
don't know seems that whole issue needs
this huge
reboot these DC people you know one
frustration that tech people have is
that they have very little influence it
seems in Washington compared to how big
that industry is and industries that are
much smaller will have much greater sway
in Washington why is Tech so bad at
having influence in Washington well I
think you're getting a lot more
influence than maybe you realize uh
quickly through national security
reasons so the feds have not stopped the
development of AI whatever you think
they should or should not do it's
basically preceded and National Security
as a Lobby they don't care about tech
per se but it is meant that on a whole
bunch of things in the future you will
get your way a bit more than you might
be expecting but a key problem you have
is so much of it is in one area and it's
also an area where there's a dominant
political party even within that
political party there's in many parts of
California a dominant faction and you
compare yourself to like the community
Bankers who are in like so many American
Counties have connections to every
single person in the House of
Representatives your issues in a way are
not very partisan uh the distortions you
cause through your privileges are
invisible to America it's not like you
know Facebook where some John Hy has
written some best-selling book
complaining about what it is you do
there's not a best-selling book
complaining about the Community Banks
and they are like ruthless and powerful
and get their way and I'm not going to
tangle with
them and you all here are so far from
that in part because you're Dynamic and
you're
clustered final question so I think
based on yesterday's uh session it seems
like Patrick's main misgiving with
progress is that you look at the young
girl cohort there's something that's not
going great with them and it seems to
you know you would hope that overtime
progress means that people are getting
better and better over time if you buy
his view of What's Happen with the young
people what's your main misgiving about
progress the thing where you're like ah
if I look at the time series data I'm
not sure I like where this trend is
going well our main concern always
should be war and I don't have any Grand
theory of what causes war or if such a
theory ever is possible but I do observe
in history that when new technologies
come along they are turned into
instruments of war and some terrible
things happen you saw this in 17th
century England you saw this with
electricity and the Machine Gun nuclear
weapons as a story and process and I'm
not sure that's ever going away so my
main concern with progress is progress
and War interact and it can be in good
ways like the world allaha Steven Pinker
has had relative peace that's fraying at
the edges and the data it's the numbers
are now moving the wrong way but it's
still way better than most pasttime
periods and we'll have to see where that
goes but there might be a ratchet effect
where Wars become more destructive and
even if they're more rare when they come
each one's a real doozy and whether we
really are or ever can be ready for that
I'm just not sure and thank you very
much dores this will be the second
session we have to end on a pessimistic
note but no the optimistic note is that
we're here human agency
matters uh if we were all sitting around
in year 1000 we never could have
imagined the world being anything like
this even a much poorer country and you
know it's up to us to take this
extraordinary and valuable Heritage and
do some more with it and that's why
we're here so I say let's give it good
to go great not to end up thanks
Tyler I'm very grateful to the roots of
progress Institute for hosting this
progress conference at which I got a
chance to chat with Tyler and ask him a
few fun questions Jason hiy and the
whole team did a wonderful job
organizing it and it was a blast and
free think media did a great job with
the videography as you can see if you
enjoyed this episode please subscribe
please like please share it and send it
to your friends who you think might
enjoy it uh and and otherwise I guess
I'll see you on the next one all right
cheers